DOCSP-15135 crud read sort update (#66)
mongodb/docs-java: source/fundamentals/crud/read-operations/sort.txt

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, we show you how to **sort** your results.

> Sorting orders the documents returned from your query by your specified 

Author: Thank you for the note Chris. On rereading, I agree that this changing of the form of the word is not beneficial for learning. Fix:

Going forward, I will try to keep the form of words consistent between usage and definition. A consistent form doesn't make readers have to do the extra work of translating between the two forms of the word.

> **sort criteria**. Sort criteria are the rules you give MongoDB that describe

Reviewer: Watch out for dropping the preposition on indirect objects:
```suggestion
**sort criteria**. Sort criteria are the rules you give to MongoDB that describe
```

Author: Thanks for the note Chris. After looking around online, it seems like there is mixed opinion on whether or not non-pronoun indirect objects require a preposition. [This site](https://www.chompchomp.com/terms/indirectobject.htm) only recommends prepositions for pronoun indirect objects. This seems like the [difference between a prepositional phrase and an indirect object](really-learn-english.com/english-direct-object-indirect-object-and-object-of-the-preposition.html#:~:text=How%20can%20you%20tell%20if,followed%20by%20the%20direct%20object.)? Not sure, would appreciate discussion on this so that going forward I do not make this mistake.

Reviewer: Not a big deal, but it reads a bit sloppy to me without when you have a direct object right there as well.

Author: Sounds good. My ear doesn't pick up on the sloppiness, so I'll try and keep an eye out for direct object oddities going forward.

> **sort criteria**. Sort criteria are the rules you give to MongoDB that describe

Author: Thank you for the note. I agree, I also think "pass to" is more commonly used. Committing suggested change.

Going forward, I will use "pass to" when discussing arguments, and will generally try to be more critical in selecting the best/most widely accepted term for an operation.

> how you would like your data ordered. Some examples of sort criteria are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
how you would like your data to be ordered. Some examples of sort criteria are:
```
Or:
```suggestion
how you would like to order your data. Some examples of sort criteria are:
```

Author: Thank you for the note. Would you consider this a style edit or a grammar edit? Taking the suggestion, however both sentences sound correct to my ear.

* Smallest number to largest number
* Earliest time of day to latest time of day
* Alphabetical order by first name 

You should read this guide if you would like to:

* Perform ascending sorts and descending sorts.
* Combine sort criteria.
* Sort on the text score of a
  :manual:`text search </core/text-search-operators/>`.

.. _sorts-crud-sort-example:

The examples in this guide use a sample collection, ``sort_example``, that
contains the following documents:
  
.. code-block:: json
  
   {"_id": 1, "letter": "c", "food": "coffee with milk"}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup"}
   {"_id": 4, "letter": "b", "food": "coffee with sugar"}
   {"_id": 5, "letter": "a", "food": "milk and cookies"}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee"}
   {"_id": 6, "letter": "c", "food": "maple donut"}

Methods For Sorting
-------------------

You can sort your results using the  ``sort()`` method of a ``FindIterable``
instance or by using the  ``Aggregates.sort()`` static factory method in an
aggregation pipeline. Both of these methods take objects that implement the

> ``Bson`` interface and specify sort criteria as arguments. For information

Author: Thanks for the note. I agree this sentence is difficult to understand. I removed the "and specify sort criteria as arguments" , and changed "take" to "receive". The sentence now reads as follows, and it sounds better to my ear.

> Both of these methods receive objects that implement the
``Bson`` interface as arguments.

I think "specify sort criteria" made the sentence do too much work, and sort criteria are discussed later in the section. Let me know if you disagree.

Fix:

on the ``Bson`` interface, see our 

> :doc:`guide on BSON </fundamentals/data-formats/document-data-format-bson/>`.   

Author: Thanks for a note. I agree an introductory sentence here is beneficial. Fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/6768e8ae97456001b7755c82ba6610f2c8394673

Going forward I will try and notice when I am introducing a new concept, and provide adequate context for unfamiliar readers.

You can use the ``sort()`` method of a ``FindIterable`` instance as follows:

.. code-block:: java

   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.ascending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   
   collection.find().sort(ascending("_id"));
 

> You can use the ``Aggregates.sort()`` method as follows:

Author: Thanks for the note. I agree some context could be helpful. I am hesitant to discuss the `Aggregates` class at this stage of the article, as `Sorts` and builders more generally are discussed in the next paragraph. I have tried to add context by saying that `Aggregates.sort()` is "within an aggregation pipeline". Let me know if you think this solves the problem or is too subtle: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/6768e8ae97456001b7755c82ba6610f2c8394673

   
.. code-block:: java

   import com.mongodb.client.model.Aggregates;
   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.ascending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   
   collection.aggregate(Arrays.asList(Aggregates.sort(ascending("_id"))));

The code snippets above both sort the documents in the
:ref:`sort_example collection <sorts-crud-sort-example>`  

> in the following order: 

Author: Thanks for the note. I didn't think to do this, but I agree at this early stage of the page I think this reinforcement makes a lot of sense. Fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/accd64cb458ec403b8bcf31d8713dcda533ad754

Going forward, I will look for opportunities to reinforce reader's understanding/expectations through meaningful transition text.

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 1, "letter": "c", "food": "coffee with milk"}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee"}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup"}
   ...

In the above code snippets, we specify our sort criteria using the ``Sorts``
builder class. While it is possible to specify sort criteria using any class
that implements the ``Bson`` interface, we recommend that you specify sort
criteria through the ``Sorts`` builder. For more information on the benefits of
using builders, see our :doc:`guide on builders </fundamentals/builders/>`. For
more information on the ``Sorts`` builder class, see our
:doc:`guide on the Sorts builder </fundamentals/builders/sort/>`.    

For more information about the classes and interfaces in this section, see the

> following API documentation:

Reviewer: This section actually does have a lot of "For more information,...". Maybe you could use a bulleted list or something like that to arrange this information.

Author: Thanks for the note. I do not understand what change you are suggesting, [as a bulleted list follows line 98](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/files/a5dd2bb61d540bf9526f7792274a21d70c91f313#diff-b4955d68d249252f5472f742c01958cda1df25f3541a79865dd4d3e61314e836R101). Are you saying that a different part of this section could benefit from being formatted as a bulleted list?

Reviewer: Note the above paragraph repeats "For more information..." several times. I'm wondering if there's a way to tidy it up a bit.

Author: Thanks for the clarification Chris.B and Chris.C. In order to both keep the link to the sorts guide closer to its context and mitigate the clunkiness caused by too much repetition of the phrase "For more information", I removed the link to the Builders guide. This positions the sorts builders link immediately after the `Sorts` class is mentioned, and prevents a triple "For more information". Let me know if you find this solutions satisfactory. Fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/57da0467c871d74a2d0596b17988856df84478dc

- :java-docs:`Sorts </apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/Sorts.html>`
- :java-docs:`Bson </apidocs/bson/org/bson/conversions/Bson.html>`
- :java-docs:`Document </apidocs/bson/org/bson/Document.html>`

Sorting Direction
-----------------

The direction of your sort can either be **ascending** or **descending**.
An ascending sort orders your results from smallest to largest. A
descending sort orders your results from largest to smallest.

Here are some examples of data sorted in ascending order:

* Numbers: 1, 2, 3, 43, 43, 55, 120
* Dates: 1990-03-10, 1995-01-01, 2005-10-30, 2005-12-21 
* Words (ASCII): Banana, Dill, carrot, cucumber, hummus

Here are some examples of data sorted in descending order:

* Numbers: 100, 30, 12, 12, 9, 3, 1
* Dates: 2020-01-01, 1998-12-11, 1998-12-10, 1975-07-22 
* Words (reverse ASCII): pear, grapes, apple, Cheese

The following subsections show how to specify these sort criteria.

Ascending
~~~~~~~~~

To specify an ascending sort, use the ``Sorts.ascending()`` static
factory method. Pass the ``Sorts.ascending()`` method
the name of the field you need to sort in ascending order.

> The ``ascending()`` method can be used as follows:

Reviewer 2: For a moment, I thought I was looking at the builders section on Sorts and not how to use sort() because of the emphasis on using the ascending() method. I think this description needs to clearly distinguish between the functionality of sort() and ascending(). First, I'd suggest framing the code sample below as how to use the sort() method, using the ascending helper, to order the matched results.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I agree, changing this to be more explicitly about the `sort()` method is probably more helpful to learners. Fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/a53492f53a1540d0f44c053437612da8a373423d

Going forward, I will try to maintain the focus of the page and better align my writing to the expectations of readers.

   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.ascending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>

   collection.find().sort(ascending("<field name>"));

The above ``sort()`` method returns a ``FindIterable`` object containing the
documents in your collection, sorted from smallest to largest on the specified
field name. 

In the following code example, we use the ``ascending()`` method to sort the
:ref:`sort_example collection <sorts-crud-sort-example>`  
by the ``_id`` field:

.. code-block:: java

   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.ascending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   
   Bson idSort = ascending("_id");
   List<Document> results = new ArrayList<>();

>    collection.find().sort(idSort).into(results);

Author: Thanks for the note. Implementing the suggested edit. I think on my first pass I though the assignment was helpful for readers to connect builders to the `Bson` interface, but now I think the "Sorting Methods" section discusses that in enough depth that the extra variable assignment will not help readers. Fix: 

Going forward, I will try to maintain parallel structure between code snippets and code examples and will explain differences if  the two have divergent structure.

   for (Document result : results) {
         System.out.println(result.toJson());
   }

The output of the code example above should look something like this: 

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 1, "letter": "c", "food": "coffee with milk"}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee"}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup"}
   ...

Descending
~~~~~~~~~~

To specify a descending sort, use the ``Sorts.descending()`` static factory

> method. Pass ``Sorts.descending()`` the name of the field you need to sort on.

Author: Thank you for the note. I agree this phrasing is more clear, and thank you for catching my not using our convention for referencing methods I.E. "The ``method()`` method".  I am committing your suggested changes, and applying similar edits to the ascending section here: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/03b8f04f01b0c06c0112f8e8fcd9a0ff7cd1d88f

method. Pass the ``Sorts.descending()`` method the name of the field you need to sort in descending order.

The following code snippet shows how to specify a descending sort on the
``_id`` field: 

.. code-block:: java
   
   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.descending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   
   collection.find().sort(descending("_id"));

The code snippet above returns the documents in the
:ref:`sample collection <sorts-crud-sort-sample>`  
in descending order: 

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 6, "letter": "c", "food": "maple donut"}
   {"_id": 5, "letter": "a", "food": "milk and cookies"}
   {"_id": 4, "letter": "b", "food": "coffee with sugar"}
   ...

.. _sorts-crud-handling-ties:

Handling Ties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A tie occurs when two or more documents have a field with identical values.

Reviewer 2: I think it could be helpful for the reader if you further qualified the documents and field. First, the documents must be matching results on which the sort operates and second, the field must be one that determines the order. If that doesn't fit into a single sentence, maybe you can use a bulleted list to describe the details of each condition.

Author: Thanks for the note. After rereading, I can see how this sentence can be clearer by specifying the  more about the necessary conditions to produce a tie. I have added a clause specifying that a tie is tied to the field being used to order your results. Fix:

Going forward, I will try to refine my senses for spotting these unclear/incomplete statements.

we encounter a tie when applying a sort to the
:ref:`sort_example collection <sorts-crud-sort-example>` using the following
code:

.. code-block:: java

   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.ascending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   
   collection.find().sort(ascending("letter"));

Since multiple documents contain "a" on the field we are sorting on, the first

> document returned could be any of the following documents:

Author: Thank you for the note. I agree this phrasing is significantly better. I will "on the field we are sorting on" and "document returned could be any of the following documents" are awkward and overloaded sentences. I will try and get better at spotting poor phrasing like this going forward. Committing suggestion.

> Since multiple documents contain the value "a" for the field on which we perform the sort,

Reviewer 2: Would it help for this to be more specific about what the "multiple documents" are? Since you're calling an operation, maybe they could be "documents that matched the query" or "results of the query" or other.

Author: Thanks for the note. I agree, "multiple documents" is unproductively vague. I have added clarifying language. fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/0d419400d1da8dcf44314d7a571718bf2e6fe068

Going forward, I will try to keep an eye for these types of unclear subjects. "Multiple Documents" is too abstract.

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup"}
   {"_id": 5, "letter": "a", "food": "milk and cookies"}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee"}

> If you need guaranteed sort order for documents that

Author: Thanks for the note. While my ear doesn't hear a problem in either "guarenteed sort order" (noun) or "guarentee (verb) sort order", after reading your comment a few times I can see that there may be opportunity for more clarity if I avoid "guarenteed sort order" (noun) phrasing. Changed to 

>  If you need to guarantee a specific sort order

such that no additional terms are introduced. Fix:

> If you need guaranteed sort order for documents that

Reviewer 2: "gauranteed sort order" or "guarantee" by itself as a noun sounds like a feature that we offer, but we're trying to describe how the user can "guarantee" something by specifying the proper criteria in their sort fields.

have fields with identical values, you can specify additional fields to sort
on in the event of a tie.

We can specify an ascending sort on the ``letter`` field followed by the
``_id`` field as follows:

.. code-block:: java

   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.ascending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   
   collection.find().sort(ascending("letter", "_id"));

The code snippet above returns the documents in the
:ref:`sort_example collection <sorts-crud-sort-example>`  
in the following order: 

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee"}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup"}
   {"_id": 5, "letter": "a", "food": "milk and cookies"}
   {"_id": 4, "letter": "b", "food": "coffee with sugar"}
   {"_id": 1, "letter": "c", "food": "coffee with milk"}
   {"_id": 6, "letter": "c", "food": "maple donut"}

Combining Sort Criteria
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> To combine sort criteria, use the ``Sorts.orderBy()`` static factory
> method. The ``orderBy()`` method builds sort criteria that apply passed 
> in sort criteria from left to right in the event of ties. 

Reviewer 2: 1) The first two sentences refer to the method two different ways which might cause some disconnect for the reader. Instead, we can use a pronoun to avoid repeating the terminology.

2) By "passed in" (prepositional phrase), I think you meant "passed-in" (adjective). However, I don't think this is the greatest adjective to describe parameters. We can omit it and the sentence still communicates the same message.

3) "builds sort criteria that apply passed in sort criteria" doesn't make much sense to me. Are there two different types of sort criteria? How do I distinguish between them?

 
```suggestion
To combine sort criteria, use the ``Sorts.orderBy()`` static factory
method. This method constructs an object containing an ordered list of sort criteria. 
When performing the sort, if the leftmost sort criteria results in a tie, the sort uses the
next sort criteria in the list to determine the order.
```

Author: Thank you for the note. I had a lot of trouble with this introduction, and this phrasing is much better than what I had. I think my second sentence was doing too much work, and your breaking it into two sentences significantly improved clarity. 

Going forward, I will look for opportunities to use pronouns to  avoid repeating terminology when it does not cause problems with clarity. 

Going forward, I will try and avoid using the same terms in slightly different ways in the same sentence. A few of your notes have touched on my doing this in different places.

criteria. When performing the sort, if the leftmost sort criteria results in a
tie, the sort uses the next sort criteria in the list to determine the order.

> In the following code snippet, we use the ``orderBy()`` method to combine a

Reviewer 2: Since you've described oerderBy() using terms like "ordered list" and "determine the order", the term "combine" used here could be confusing. Maybe you can use different terminology to explain that the sorts you are passing are considered in order?

Author: Thanks for the note. I agree, introducing the term "combine" adds unnecessary complexity for learners. Fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/86eef3bcef3c19d3dfd6cdea3fb63f8069624710

Going forward, I will try to be mindful of introducing new terms in an unproductive way, and will try to build empathy for the challenges learners face in being confronted with a new term.

.. code-block:: java

   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.orderBy;
   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.ascending;
   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.descending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>

   Bson orderBySort = orderBy(descending("letter"), ascending("_id"));
   collection.find().sort(orderBySort);

The code snippet above returns the documents in the
:ref:`sort_example collection <sorts-crud-sort-example>`
in the following order: 

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 1, "letter": "c", "food": "coffee with milk"}
   {"_id": 6, "letter": "c", "food": "maple donut"}
   {"_id": 4, "letter": "b", "food": "coffee with sugar"}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee"}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup"}
   {"_id": 5, "letter": "a", "food": "milk and cookies"}

.. _sorts-crud-text-search:

Text Search
-----------

You can specify the order of the results of a 
:manual:`text search </text-search/>` by how closely they match your
search string. Each of your search results has a

> :manual:`text score </reference/operator/aggregation/meta/#exp._S_meta>`, a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:manual:`text score </reference/operator/aggregation/meta/#exp._S_meta>` which is a
```

Author: Thanks for the note. Using "which" with no comma to make [ this a restrictive clause](https://ell.stackexchange.com/questions/134665/which-vs-that-and-comma-before-which) sounds better to my ear and seems to improve clarity. Committing suggestion.

> numerical value indicating how well that result matches your search. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
numerical value that indicates how closely that text value matches your search. 
```

Author: ```suggestion
numerical value that indicates how closely that result matches your search. 
```

Thanks for the note. I agree that "closely" is a better word than "well" here, and I agree that "indicating" should be split into "that indicates", however I disagree that "result" should be changed to "text value". The reason for this is that the text search is by document rather than by field, so I think it is more accurate to that the text score is saying how well a search matched an individual result.

Reviewer 2: > the text search is by document rather than by field
Isn't it by one or more fields as specified by the text index? https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/text-search/#text-index

Author: Yes, it is by one or more fields as specified by the text index. My choice of word "document" earlier was imprecise, apologies. I believe the word "result" better conveys the possible multi-field search happening in a `$text` operation better than "text value" which to me implies a single string value in a field. If you disagree with this assessment, I can change "result" to "text value", as both seem appropriate.

Use the ``Sorts.metaTextScore()`` static factory method to build your sort
criteria to sort by the text score.

.. warning:: Make Sure to Create a Text Index

   You need a :manual:`text index </core/index-text/>` on your collection to
   perform a text search. See the server manual documentation for more
   information on how to
   :manual:`create a text index </core/index-text/#create-text-index>`.

In the following code example, we show how you can use the
``Sorts.metaTextScore()`` method to sort the results of a text
search on the :ref:`sort_example collection <sorts-crud-sort-example>`.
The code example uses the :doc:`Filters </fundamentals/builders/filters>`,
:doc:`Indexes </fundamentals/builders/indexes>`, and
:doc:`Projections </fundamentals/builders/projections>` builders.
The code example performs the following actions:

#. Creates a text index for your
   :ref:`sort_example collection <sorts-crud-sort-example>`
   on the ``food`` field. In a production application you would not
   want to call the ``createIndex()`` method every search, but it is alright for

>    the purpose of this example.

Reviewer 2: Let's omit this. There are plenty of other things we wouldn't do every search in our examples in a production environment, so it's not necessary to mention that. You could instead mention that no new index is created by this method if the index already exists.

Author: Thanks for the note.  Agree that mentioning the behavior of the `createIndex()` method is probably more helpful information.  Fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/17cb5967fd954884643786a57b977cb852607297

Going forward, I will try to better refine my sense for what is/isn't helpful context to include in an example.

   ``score`` field. This projection is optional if your MongoDB instance is
   running MongoDB 4.4 or later. 
#. Sorts your results by text score (best match first).

.. code-block:: java

   import com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts;
   import com.mongodb.client.model.Projections;
   import com.mongodb.client.model.Filters;
   import com.mongodb.client.model.Indexes;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   
   collection.createIndex(Indexes.text("food"));
   Bson metaTextScoreSort = Sorts.metaTextScore("score");
   Bson metaTextScoreProj = Projections.metaTextScore("score");
   String searchTerm = "maple donut";
   Bson searchQuery = Filters.text(searchTerm);
   collection.find(searchQuery)
            .projection(metaTextScoreProj)
            .sort(metaTextScoreSort)
            .into(results);
   for (Document result : results) {
         System.out.println(result.toJson());
   }

The output of the code example above should look something like this: 

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 6, "letter": "c", "food": "maple donut", "score": 1.5}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee", "score": 0.75}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup", "score": 0.75}

> .. note:: MongoDB 4.4 or later ``$meta`` Behavior

Author: Thanks for the note. I agree, leading with version can be unhelpful and readers may glaze over text that has to do with version numbers.

Going forward, I will try to specify place behavior descriptions before version numbers such that readers better focus on what is being stressed in a section.

  When using MongoDB 4.4 or later, projecting ``Projections.metaTextScore()`` 
  into your ``FindIterable`` instance is not necessary to sort on the text
  score. In addition, MongoDB 4.4 or later disregards the field name you specify
  in a ``$meta`` text score aggregation operation used in a sort. This means
  that the field name argument you pass to ``Sorts.metaTextScore()`` is ignored

>   in MongoDB 4.4 or later.

Reviewer 2: Could you find a way to explain this without repeating "MongoDB 4.4 or later" beyond the title and maybe the first sentence? It only seems to distract from the content.

Author: Thank you for the note. I am having trouble cutting down "MongoDB 4.4 or later" usage under two times in the note as one time MongoDB 4.4 needs to be an object and the other time it needs to be the subject. One time the reader is using it, the other time the server itself is ignoring some input. I  agree that including "MongoDB 4.4 or later" multiple times is cumbersome, but I am not sure how to get it cleaner than this fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/13a9cd3f88619242918961478e8c9ec0ae5ee063

Reviewer 2: How about introducing the paragraph with the condition and explaining that everything that follows is related to that condition? E.g. "The structure of text searches has changed for MongoDB 4.4 and later. When projecting ... In addition, the field name you specify in a $meta text score aggregation operation used in the sort is ignored..."

You should read this guide if you would like to:

* Perform ascending sorts and descending sorts.
* Combine sort criteria.
* Sort on the text score of a
  :manual:`text search </core/text-search-operators/>`.

.. _sorts-crud-sort-example:

The examples in this guide use a sample collection, ``sort_example``, that
contains the following documents:
  
.. code-block:: json
  
   {"_id": 1, "letter": "c", "food": "coffee with milk"}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup"}
   {"_id": 4, "letter": "b", "food": "coffee with sugar"}
   {"_id": 5, "letter": "a", "food": "milk and cookies"}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee"}
   {"_id": 6, "letter": "c", "food": "maple donut"}

Methods For Sorting
-------------------

You can sort results retrieved by a query and you can sort results 
within an aggregation pipeline. To sort your query results, use the
``sort()`` method of a ``FindIterable`` instance. To sort your results within an 
aggregation pipeline, use the ``Aggregates.sort()`` static factory method. Both
of these methods receive objects that implement the ``Bson`` interface as
arguments. For information on the ``Bson`` interface, see our 

> :doc:`guide on BSON </fundamentals/data-formats/document-data-format-bson/>`.   

Author: Thanks for the note. After making the switch, I agree changing this link to the API documentation probably provides more helpful information to the user. This relates to https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66#discussion_r601800649, but I think is a slightly different suggestion as it is about the content of the link more so than an inline change. Fix: 

Going forward, I will try to be more critical about which external links provide the most helpful information.

.. warning:: Make Sure to Create a Text Index

   You need a :manual:`text index </core/index-text/>` on your collection to
   perform a text search. See the server manual documentation for more
   information on how to
   :manual:`create a text index </core/index-text/#create-text-index>`.

In the following code example, we show how you can use the
``Sorts.metaTextScore()`` method to sort the results of a text
search on the :ref:`sort_example collection <sorts-crud-sort-example>`.
The code example uses the :doc:`Filters </fundamentals/builders/filters>`,
:doc:`Indexes </fundamentals/builders/indexes>`, and
:doc:`Projections </fundamentals/builders/projections>` builders.
The code example performs the following actions:

#. Creates a text index for your
   :ref:`sort_example collection <sorts-crud-sort-example>`
   on the ``food`` field. If the index specified in your call to the
   ``createIndex()`` method already exists, calling it will not create a new
   index.
#. Runs your text search for the phrase "maple donut".
#. Projects text scores into your query results as the
   ``score`` field. This projection is optional if your MongoDB instance is

>    running MongoDB 4.4 or later. 

Author: Thanks for the note. After rereading, I can see how including this information disrupts the logical flow of information, and is largely unhelpful. Fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/37235712a517f331822f6146e58937dca900931b

#. Sorts your results by text score (best match first).

.. code-block:: java

   import com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts;
   import com.mongodb.client.model.Projections;
   import com.mongodb.client.model.Filters;
   import com.mongodb.client.model.Indexes;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   
   collection.createIndex(Indexes.text("food"));
   Bson metaTextScoreSort = Sorts.metaTextScore("score");
   Bson metaTextScoreProj = Projections.metaTextScore("score");
   String searchTerm = "maple donut";
   Bson searchQuery = Filters.text(searchTerm);
   collection.find(searchQuery)
            .projection(metaTextScoreProj)
            .sort(metaTextScoreSort)
            .into(results);
   for (Document result : results) {
         System.out.println(result.toJson());
   }

The output of the code example above should look something like this: 

.. code-block:: json

   {"_id": 6, "letter": "c", "food": "maple donut", "score": 1.5}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee", "score": 0.75}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup", "score": 0.75}

.. note:: ``$meta`` Behavior in MongoDB 4.4 or Later

>   If you are using MongoDB 4.4 or later, projecting

Reviewer 2: This should be indented 3 spaces to line up with the "n" in "note" similar to what you have for the warning admonition you used earlier.

Author: Thanks for the note. I'm surprised this did not raise any errors (that I am aware of anyway). Going forward, I will make these checks manually. Fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/fc5d2ad9552aa5f7de81850a8090b66337683917

An ascending sort orders your results from smallest to largest. A
descending sort orders your results from largest to smallest.

Here are some examples of data sorted in ascending order:

* Numbers: 1, 2, 3, 43, 43, 55, 120
* Dates: 1990-03-10, 1995-01-01, 2005-10-30, 2005-12-21 
* Words (ASCII): Banana, Dill, carrot, cucumber, hummus

Here are some examples of data sorted in descending order:

* Numbers: 100, 30, 12, 12, 9, 3, 1
* Dates: 2020-01-01, 1998-12-11, 1998-12-10, 1975-07-22 
* Words (reverse ASCII): pear, grapes, apple, Cheese

The following subsections show how to specify these sort criteria.

Ascending
~~~~~~~~~

To specify an ascending sort, use the ``Sorts.ascending()`` static
factory method. Pass the ``Sorts.ascending()`` method
the name of the field you need to sort in ascending order.

You can use pass the ``sort()`` method the output of the ``Sorts.ascending()``
method to specify an ascending sort on a field as follows:

.. code-block:: java

   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.ascending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>

   collection.find().sort(ascending("<field name>"));

> The above ``sort()`` method returns a ``FindIterable`` object containing the

Reviewer 3: This could be misleading to a Java developer.  A Java developer reading that an `Iterable` contains a bunch of objects might be led to think that the objects are all in memory, when in fact the FindIterable is just a logical collection (that doesn't actually contain any documents at all in memory)  that should be streamed via a cursor.  I'm not sure how to rephrase it but maybe you can think of an alternative?  Or we can discuss on Slack.

Author: Thanks for the note Jeff. I agree that "containing" is misleading here. Thanks for catching this and helping me better understand cursors in MongoDB. Do you think this edit fixes the issue (I received help [on this edit from Chris Bush in this Slack thread](https://mongodb.slack.com/archives/GETCHDLCB/p1617377512125500)): https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/d9aff574d889e5104c5dc23f6f7861a425be339e

Reviewer 3: Yep!

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, we show you how to **sort** your results.

Sorting orders the documents returned from your query by your specified 

> **sort criteria**. Sort criteria are the rules you give MongoDB that describe

Author: Thank you for the note. I believe this suggestion is incorrect, as MongoDB performs the sort. This stance is supported by a technical reviewing having approved this phrasing in a previous review.

how you would like your data ordered. Some examples of sort criteria are:

* Smallest number to largest number
* Earliest time of day to latest time of day
* Alphabetical order by first name 

You should read this guide if you would like to:

* Perform ascending sorts and descending sorts.
* Combine sort criteria.
* Sort on the text score of a
  :manual:`text search </core/text-search-operators/>`.

.. _sorts-crud-sort-example:

The examples in this guide use a sample collection, ``sort_example``, that
contains the following documents:
  
.. code-block:: json
  
   {"_id": 1, "letter": "c", "food": "coffee with milk"}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup"}
   {"_id": 4, "letter": "b", "food": "coffee with sugar"}
   {"_id": 5, "letter": "a", "food": "milk and cookies"}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee"}
   {"_id": 6, "letter": "c", "food": "maple donut"}

Methods For Sorting
-------------------

You can sort your results using the  ``sort()`` method of a ``FindIterable``
instance or by using the  ``Aggregates.sort()`` static factory method in an
aggregation pipeline. Both of these methods take objects that implement the

> ``Bson`` interface and specify sort criteria as arguments. For information

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:ref:`Bson <bson>` interface and specify sort criteria as arguments.
```
The sentence after can be removed.

Author: Thank you for the note. I disagree with this suggestion as the link would not provide context to what it is linking to, in addition the suggested link is not linking to the documentation of the BSON interface but to the Bson fundamentals page.

Reviewer: Maybe you could link to the javadoc for Bson here instead?

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. In a discussion with Chris.C, I was told that as a general rule we are trying to avoid inline Java Doc links and instead group them at the end of the section. This discussions where this took place are linked to in https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66#discussion_r601822352. I should have probably listed that as well in my earlier comment in this thread, apologies.

on the ``Bson`` interface, see our 
:doc:`guide on Bson </fundamentals/data-formats/document-data-format-bson/>`.   

.. _sorts-crud-find-iterable-example:

You can use the ``sort()`` method of a ``FindIterable`` instance as follows:

.. code-block:: java

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   

>    collection.find().sort(new Document("_id", 1)));

Reviewer 4: Suggestion: I think you should mention what 1 and -1 means.  The reader might not make the connection with your equivalent example.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. Your suggestion raises a lot of interesting questions. I am not sure what the right call is here, as we are trying to push users towards the builders style for creating sort specifications. Not sure how in depth we should go into MQL? Should we explain a code snippet that we are actively trying to discourage users from using? Would be curious to see what other people on the team have to say to this point?

@ccho-mongodb, @terakilobyte, any thoughts? Should we explain patterns we are trying to have users avoid?

Reviewer 2: I am trying to figure out what you (Alek) want to do since you're presenting both the MQL here and Sorts builder further down. If you want to keep both, I think Kailie's suggestion is a valid point. You could explain it in as little as a sentence and link back to the server manual for more info.

My preference is not to show both on this page because it extends the amount of explanation needed and can easily be missed because it requires vertical scrolling and is further separated by the Aggregates code example. The only page I might provide this comparison is on the Sort builders page to show equivalency.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. After implementing the rewrite, I agree that the `Sorts` builder page is a more natural location for the equivalency example. Fix: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/66/commits/a7c3b22a9f311aba0269920c9763ff42a08ee906

   {"_id": 1, "letter": "c", "food": "coffee with milk"}
   {"_id": 2, "letter": "a", "food": "donuts and coffee"}
   {"_id": 3, "letter": "a", "food": "maple syrup"}
   ...

In the above code snippets, we specify our sort criteria by passing a
``Document`` object (which implements the ``Bson`` interface) to our sort
method. While this will run without errors, we recommend that you instead
specify sort criteria through the ``Sorts`` builder class. 

The following code snippet is equivalent to the
:ref:`FindIterable example above <sorts-crud-find-iterable-example>`. 

.. code-block:: java

   import static com.mongodb.client.model.Sorts.ascending;

   // <MongoCollection setup code here>
   
   collection.find().sort(ascending("_id"));

The remainder of this guide will specify sort criteria using the ``Sorts`` class.

For more information on the benefits of using builders, see our
:doc:`guide on builders </fundamentals/builders/>`. For more information on the
``Sorts`` builder class, see our
:doc:`guide on the Sorts builder </fundamentals/builders/sort/>`.    

For more information about the classes and interfaces in this section, see the
following API documentation:

> - :java-docs:`FindIterable </apidocs/mongodb-driver-sync/com/mongodb/client/FindIterable.html>` 

Reviewer 4: Suggestion: Instead of having a bulleted list, you can link the java-docs where the class/interface is mentioned.  This avoids having to put it again at the bottom.

Author: This style was recommended in by Chris Cho [here](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-java/pull/65#discussion_r598887796) and [here](https://mongodb.slack.com/archives/GETCHDLCB/p1616618748074300?thread_ts=1616614407.070400&cid=GETCHDLCB) (see the second to the last bullet). That is the background for including the bulleted list. Please let me know if you disagree with this position, and if you do we should have a team meeting to reach consensus on style in regards to this issue.
